*This is just the readME.md in a text file.

The Sound of Success: An Analysis of Billboard Top 100 Trends (1958-2025)

Haiden Hunter, Ryan Armendariz-Lopez
hnh21@pitt.edu, raa193@pitt.edu

Our Research Question: 
What musical characteristics are most strongly associated with chart success on the Billboard Top 100, and 
how have these features evolved over time? Drawing on publicly available datasets from Billboard, Spotify, 
and Genius, we plan to merge chart rankings with quantitative audio features such as tempo, energy, key, and danceability.

Why This Research Question Interesting to Us:
This research topic interests us because we’re both independent music producers trying to make our way in an 
industry that can feel impossible to break into without a major label or massive marketing budget. We’ve always 
wondered what really separates songs that make it onto the Billboard charts from those that don’t. By analyzing 
data on popular songs, we hope to understand what kinds of musical and lyrical features tend to connect with audiences.
Our goal isn’t to copy trends, but to use data to make smarter creative choices and help other indie artists do the same. 

Why Do You Consider Your Project Useful and Who Would Benefit From Your Model:
This project is useful because it transforms subjective ideas about “what makes a hit” into interpretable insights. 
Music producers, songwriters, and marketers could use the findings to identify shifting stylistic trends, benchmark new 
releases against historical patterns, or anticipate emerging sounds likely to resonate with audiences. Ultimately, it 
would be great to have both a predictive tool to identify where a song might end up on the charts based on its quantitative 
audio features, as well as general analysis of chart history to predict what trends might be on the rise.

How We Obtained the Data and What the Features Mean:
We obtained both our data sets from kaggle. Origionally we only had 1, however we were forced to comprimise because the 
Spotify API we were planning to use had been terminated since we brainstormed. Our plan was to take each track name and artist, 
and put it into the Spotify API to get track features that Spotify keeps track of such as dancability, tempo, enegry, key, etc... 
But since the API was no longer publically available, I found a dataset that kept track of 1.2+ millions songs that had already 
been run through the Spotify API. This led to us loosing about half of the data, however we were still able to get the information 
of about 180,000+ songs on the Billboard Hot 100. You can see how we did this in the notebook.
For the hot-100-current.csv, the features are very self explanitory. It is a dataset that logs the Billboard Hot 100 every week. 
The main feature of importance being wks_on_chart, which describes how many weeks a song has been on the Billboard Hot 100.
However, the tracks_features.csv is more complicated. Track information is self eplanitory, but the track features are confusing.

Explicit: Whether the song is explicit or not.
Danceability: How suitable a track is for dancing.
Energy: How intense and active a track is.
Key: The musical key of the track.
Loudness: Overall loudness of the track, in decibels.
Speechiness: Proportion of spoken words in the track.
Acousticness: Confidence measure of whether a track is acoustic.
Liveness: Detects live audience in a track. Represents the probability that a track was performed live.
Valence: Measures how positive a track sounds, from 1 (extremely positive) to 0 (extremely negative).
Tempo: Overall tempo of a track, in beats per minute (BPM).
Duration_MS: Duration of a track, in milliseconds.
Time_Signature: Overall time signature of a track.

Data Cleaning:
The Billboard Hot 100 dataset was super clean which was great. However all of our issues came with the the failure of the Spotify API. 
We ended up losing half of our dataset since the tracks_features.csv only included half of the songs. We had to just bite the bullet and 
delete the other half of the billboard dataset. Luckily we still had 180,000+ tracks which will be more than plenty for a model.
Since the billboard data is accurate, it contained no accidental outliers meaning we decided to keep all of the data. 
As we move forward we will see if scaling will be necessary. However, based on our current plans it will not be necessary since every 
feature is calibrated to its own 0 to 1 scale already.

Feature Selection:
We plan on creating a few models with different combinations of predictors for each tracks danceability, energy, loudness, key, speechiness, 
acousticness, liveness, valence, tempo, duration, key, and explicitness. A possible set of predictors for a baseline could be energy, loudness, 
valence, tempo, and key. These features would be used to predict weeks on the chart, which would be our response. We are still figuring out 
which predictors would be best. However, we chose those as our baseline as they are features musicians can easily control through production 
and mixing, allowing the artist to make fundamentally different versions of a song, since these features are comprised of the key components of 
a song, and use our model to predict which will perform better on the charts.

Overall Thoughts:
We have a lot of data, which causes our visualizations to just look like blobs. Yet, there are already clear patterns appearing.
We are excited to continue mssing with the data and begin to create and test our models. Also, our notebook can take up to 5 to 10 minutes 
to run depending on the speed of your computer so please be patient.